
                         Problems Solved by
                       Using the HP 110
                      Portable Computer

                     --Case Histories--


Case 1:
(date: 2-86)
(place: Ojai, CA)

	Problem:  Client wanted a quick study done a drilling fund.
  The study was to include: formation of fund, marketing of fund,
 and selection of prospects.


	Solution:  Client had archived most information using the
 portable computer.  This information consisted of:  initial and
 final structure of fund, trip notes recorded on the portable,
 contracts, economic runs done in the office and on the road, and
 final recommendations.  This information was then printed out and
 used for exhibits in the study.

	Results:  Since the portable had been used to track
 information on this fund, both in and out of the office, a clear
 history of what had occured could accurately be documented.  The
 client received a quick and accurate study, saving both time and
 money.
   
Case 2:
(date: 1-86)
(place: Los Angeles, CA)

     Problem:  During an out of town meeting with an investors
 group about a producing property purchase, one member wanted to
 know what would result by dropping oil price from $24 per barrel
 used in the original economics, to $18 per barrel.


	Solution:  Complete economics were re-run in the conference
 room using the portable computer and the lower oil price.  A copy
 of the new economics were printed on the portable printer and
 distributed to the group.


	Results:  The adjusted economics were calculated and
 distributed to the group 10 minutes after the question was asked.
  The meeting continued and was not postponed, saving at least one
 days travel costs and time for a group of five (about $3000).


Case 3:  
(date:  10-85)
(place:  at the well-site, northern California)

	Problem:  Four partners were involved in the drilling of one
 well. They all wanted daily drilling reports and important show
 information.

	Solution:  A drilling report was kept on the portable
 computer and printed daily.  This information was read over the
 phone to the partners each morning.  The reports were later
 combined on the computer's word processor into a final report.

	Results:  Daily drilling reports were better organized and
 communicated using the portable computer.  The final drilling
 report was quickly finished and sent to the partners, saving
 decision making time. (NOTE: If each partner had an office
 computer, daily drilling information could be sent by modem).


Case 4:  
(date:  10-85)
(place:  at the well-site, northern California)

	Problem:  The same four partners wanted log calculations
 reported from the field.

	Solution:  Shale corrected log calculations and reserves
 were calculated on the portable computer and printed. The process
 took less than an hour.  The calculations were then sent to each
 partner.

	Results:  Two hours of calculation time were saved by using
 the portable computer versus hand calculation time.  The portable
 computer saved about $1500 of rig time waiting on calculations.


Case 5:
(date: 10-85)
(place:  at the well-site, northern California)

	Problem:  A cross-section through area of drill-site had to
 be changed to honor data from newly drilled well.

	Solution:  Well tops were entered into the portable computer
 and a new cross-section was drawn.

	Results:  The new cross-section took about 10 seconds for
 the computer to draw.  This saved about an hours time making
 corrections by hand.  The cross-section section helped determine
 the geometry and extent of the reservoir.

Case 6:  
(date:  7-85)
(place:  Midland, TX)

	Problem:  A final decision to commit to or drop a $500,000
 drilling program had to be made in a two day period.

	Solution:  Upon arriving at the seller's office and
 reviewing the final geologic and engineering data, economics on
 seven different prospects were determined using the portable
 computer. The buyer's economics used lower oil prices and
 reserves than used in the seller's economics.

	Results:  Economics provided by seller showed 3.5:1 return
 on investment compared to buyer's 2.5:1 return.  The buyer
 decided not to pursue this drilling program. 

Case 7:
(date: 11-84)
(places:  Denver, CO and Midland, TX)

	Problem:  Original prospects for a 1984 drilling fund ran
 into title problems and could not be drilled within the
 guidelines set out in the fund offering.

	Solution:  The portable computer was used to help review
 economics on 36 different prospects during one weeks time.
    Drilling prospects that didn't meet the funds criteria were
 quickly eliminated while still in seller's office.  Time was
 spent on those prospects having the best looking economics.  

	Results:  More prospects could be reviewed by using the
 portable computer for first-cut economics.  This resulted in
 finding a replacement drilling program for the fund by the end of
 the week.  Since a replacement project could be found on short
 notice, the fund was able to close, saving over $100,000 in fund
 formation expenses.

Case 8:
(date: 9-84)
(Salt Lake City, Utah)

	Problem:  Structuring of a year-end drilling fund had been
 created and proposed to a financial group.  The group wanted to
 change structuring of the fund before acceptance.  Time was not
 available to return to the office, restructure the economics of
 the fund, and meet with the brokerage group again.

	Solution:  That night, the portable computer was used to
 change the original fund structure to meet the needs of the
 brokerage group.  The revised structure was approved by the
 financial group the following morning.

	Results:  The fund was approved by all parties, and legal
 work on the offering began that day.  The fund raised $1,000,000
 and closed December 31, 1984.
    
	    