COMPUTER AIDED FIELD REPORTING SYSTEM, CITY OF WESTMINSTER, COLORADO


SYNOPSIS
--------
The City of Westminster, Colorado, Police Department utilizes notebook sized 
portable computers as report taking tools.  Individually issued Radio Shack 
Model 100/102 portable computers are being used by the uniformed patrol 
officers to write offense reports in the field.  The reports are then printed 
out at the police station or are transmitted over the telephone lines to a 
host computer at the station for review and processing.

SETTING
-------
Westminster is a City of 75,000 people located North of Denver.  Its police 
department consists of 102 sworn and 54 civilian personnel, with a uniformed 
patrol divison staffing of 82 people.

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
------------------
Patrol Officers spend a significant portion of thier time writing reports 
about the crimes or incidents that they investigate.  These reports are 
completed in a number of traditional methods at various agencies across the 
country.  The most common methods include writing reports by hand, typing the 
reports on a typewriter in the station, and phoning the reports to a voice 
recording device where they are typed later by a clerical pool.  One primary 
goal of many progressive police managers is to speed up and make more 
efficient the report writing process, and eventually move to a "paperless" 
reporting system where a report is written and stored electronically, to be 
printed only when a hard copy is actually needed.  Any streamlining of the 
report writing process makes the police officer more efficient by freeing his 
time from writing so that he can be redirected to more active functions.

In January of 1985, the Westminster City Manager's office became aware of a 
pilot portable computer experiment in St. Petersburg, Florida, and alerted the 
Police Chief to its potential.  Two Westminster officers were then dispatched 
to St. Petersburg to learn about their experience.  After a two day visit with 
Sergeant Maurice McGough (the Father/Guru of police laptop applications), they 
returned and initiated an experiment with five portable computers and a "host" 
PC in the station.  During the test the Florida model was modified several 
times to conform to Colorado reporting standards, and the host equipment was 
replaced with different types of equipment and software.  This test phase 
placed a battery operated laptop computer, on which reports could be prepared, 
in the hands of the patrol officer in the field.  Participants were hand 
selected to include typist, non-typist, good report writer, bad report writer, 
and desk officer.  Reports were generated on the computers in the field and 
then printed at the station, or transmitted to the supervisor at the station 
via telephone modem.  At the supervisor review level, the printed reports were 
folded into the existing paper flow.  An evaluation of the six month test 
period revealed numerous positive advantages to the use of the computers and 
supported their use as a productive first step towards a paperless system.  
The test revealed a variable increase in report writing speed (depending on 
typing skills), more complete reports resulting from the interactive report 
writing program, a drastic increase in legibility from handwritten reports, 
and more efficently written reports due to the officers' ability to easily 
edit, correct or modify the reports in the computer.

After the trial period, a decision was made to implement "CAFRS" (Computer 
Aided Field Reporting System)(the Chief wouldn't go for "CARP", Computer 
Assisted Reporting Program) and outfit the entire patrol force with portable 
computers over a period of several years.  By April of 1987, fifty-two 
laptops, one PC host, and two printers were in service.  Having seen the 
success of the pilot project and the ease with which reports were being 
generated, the majority of the patrol officers accepted the computer concept 
enthusiastically, and those without computers are constantly reminding the 
coordinator that they wish to be next on the list for one.
Each officer is currently issued a Radio Shack Model 100/102 computer with 32K 
of RAM, a padded carrying case, and modem cables.  Cost per officer is about 
$500.00.  An 8K report writing program written in Basic resides in RAM for the 
officer to actually write the report with.  Extra memory in the form of third 
party supplied bank memory enhancements are added to the desk officers' 
computers to support the greater number of reports they write during a shift.  
The host computer is an IBM PC XT compatible Tandy 1200 HD running 
"Telecommuter Plus" software.  This host and its software receives and stores 
incoming reports automatically, and does not require and "operator" until the 
supervisor is ready to review and print the reports that have been received 
via the phone.

Training of the officers in the use of the portables and the program has been 
relatively inexpensive and simple.  Each officer received eight hours of 
classroom instruction and was allowed to practice for a week between calls 
before he started taking reports on the computer. Within two months, even the 
hunt and peck typists were typing faster than they had hand printed their 
reports.

Equipment repair has been minimal, with a few equipment breakdowns mostly 
attributable to accidental harsh handling.  Support costs are primarily paper 
and batteries.  After the initial month or so of constant practice and 
attention, the average battery usage is three four-packs of AA batteries per 
officer per month.

There is not a lot of hidden cost or overhead for administration of the 
program.  Coordination of the effort is assigned as an additional duty of an 
existing Watch Commander, and software modification support is provided by the 
city data processing division.

THE FUTURE
----------
While the use of this generation of laptop computer has enhanced the report 
writing function at Westminster, the future holds great promise for improving 
the process and moving even closer to a paperless system.  Movement ahead, 
however, depends not only on technological advancement, but on the 
availability of the technology at affordable costs to financially strapped 
municipal governments.  While microelectronics technology is rapidly 
advancing, it does not appear to have yet reached the point where a paperless 
police report system could be implemented cost effectively. (Cost 
effectiveness is, of course, relative to the financial resourses of, and the 
priorities of, the individual city.) Westminster will continue to experiment 
with enhanced technology as it's cost becomes manageable and it's physical 
size becomes convienient; continue to exchange information with other 
interested agencies; and implement the new technology when it appears 
beneficial.

FOR MORE INFORMATION
--------------------
If you have questions or want more detailed information, or are interested in 
providing suggestions or information, contact Lieutenant Bill Martin, 
Westminster Police Department, 8800 N. Sheridan Blvd., Westminster, Co. 80030, 
Tel. (303) 429-1546 X 347; or shoot me an EasyPlex at 73226,2751.

Also see Maurice McGough's and Leonard Leedy's POLICE.100 and POLICE.DOC in 
the M100SIG DL4; and related articles in the April, 1986, "PICO" and the 
March, 1985, "PORTABLE 100/200."

Bill Martin

