                          Z A P - 6 0 0

                     I N S T R U C T I O N S


     ZAP-600 is a disk editing utility program for the Tandy  600
Portable  Computer.  ZAP-600 is written in BASIC, and it performs
CALLS to the UTILITY.LIB subroutine library.  Tandy 600 BASIC and
a  copy of the UTILITY.LIB subroutine library MUST be resident in
RAM in order for ZAP-600 to function.

     ZAP-600 performs  three  functions:  Disk  analysis;  Sector
copy;  and  Sector  Edit.    Disk  sector  reading and writing is
performed  using  the  DBSYSINT  subroutine  in  the  UTILITY.LIB
library  to  access BIOS interrupts as described in the Tandy 600
Programmers Reference Guide (R/S 26-3901).   In  theory,  ZAP-600
should be capable of reading and writing any MS-DOS single-sided,
double density disk in drive A: or B:,  although  this  "feature"
has not been tested by the author.

     ZAP-600 may be used to modify  disk  directory  entries,  to
modify  or  repair the File Allocation Table (FAT) and to recover
or copy portions of disk files.   The  program  is  not  terribly
user-friendly,  and  users who attempt to alter directory entries
or the FATs should use ZAP-600 in conjunction with a good  MS-DOS
disk manual (e.g. one of the Norton Utilities manuals).

WARNING:  This  preliminary  version  of  ZAP-600  is  not  fully
debugged,  and  errors  are fairly likely to occur.  COPY all RAM
resident files to disk BEFORE attempting to use  ZAP-600  Version
1.00!!!   The program is being placed in the public domain in the
hope that others will test, debug, revise and  enhance  it.    As
Tandy says, "No warranties, written or implied, ..."


                        ZAP-600 Functions

Main Menu

     The ZAP-600 Main Menu presents four options:

        Edit Disk Sectors               Analyze Disk
        Copy Disk Sectors               Exit ZAP-600

     Each of the main options is discussed below.  To  select  an
option, use the ARROW keys to highlight it, and press ENTER.


Edit Disk Sectors


     The EDIT mode permits any individual disk sector to be read,
modified and written.

     When EDIT mode is selected, you will first be  prompted  for
the  drive number and the absolute sector number to be read.  The
built-in drive is number 0.  Absolute sectors are between  0  and
2CF  (hex)  on  a standard Tandy-600 disk, and the program should
force you to remain within the proper ranges (more on this  under
the  Analyze  Disk  command).    The prompts for drive and sector
appear on the left side of the screen, and  ALL  numeric  entries
are  in  hexidecimal.    To  accept a current value, press ENTER.
ESCape will generally backup one command throughout the program.

     When a sector is read from disk, the sector contents will be
displayed  in  Hex  and  in  ASCII,  and you may step through the
display using the arrow keys as follows:

     Right Arrow:  Moves the cursor forward One Byte.

     Left Arrow:  Moves the cursor backward One Byte.

     Down Arrow:  Moves the cursor down One Line (16 bytes)

     Up Arrow:  Moves the cursor up One Line (16 bytes)

     Shift/Right Arrow: Moves the cursor to the right end
                    of the current line.

     Shift/Left Arrow: Moves the cursor to the left end
                    of the current line.

     Shift/Down Arrow: Moves the cursor forward 256 bytes
                    (the screen will clear, and 16 new lines
                    will be displayed)

     Shift/Up Arrow: Moves the cursor backward 256 bytes
                    (the screen will clear, and 16 new lines
                    will be displayed)


     While in Edit Disk Sectors mode, the following commands  may
also be performed:

     ESCape:  Returns to the Main Menu display.

     R[ead]:  Returns to the Drive/Sector prompts in order to
               read a new sector.

     E[dit]:  Allows individual bytes in the current sector to be
               modified (in hexidecimal).

     W[rite]: Writes the current sector buffer, as displayed, to
               any specified sector on any drive (0-1).


     The E[dit] sub-mode allows the byte at  the  current  sector
offset  position to be modified.  "EDIT" appears on the left side
of the display, and you may enter two hexidecimal digits  (0-9,A-
F).    When  two  hex  digits  are  entered, the sector offset is
incremented by one, up to the end of the current sector.    Press
ESCape to return to the DISPLAY mode.

     The W[rite] sub-mode allows the current sector to be written
to  any  location on either disk drive.  You will be prompted for
drive and absolute sector  number,  and  you  will  be  asked  to
CONFIRM  the  write  operation  before  it  is  completed.  ENTER
accepts the current values in the drive and sector  prompts,  and
ESCape  may  be  used  to  back up to the previous prompt.  Using
ESCape during the Drive prompt will abort the W[rite] command, as
will any response other than "Y" to the CONFIRM prompt.


Copy Disk Sectors

     The COPY function allows  a  specific  sector  or  range  of
sectors  (1-9)  to be copied from any location on the disk to any
other location on the same disk or on a different disk.  The copy
command  requests the following information (all responses are in
hexidecimal):

       Source Drive: 000           (Range: 0-1)
       Starting Sector: 000        (Range: 0-max)
       Number of Sectors: 000      (Range: 1-9)
       Destination Drive: 000      (Range: 0-1)
       Starting Sector: 000        (Range: 0-max)

     If the source drive and the destination drive are the  same,
ZAP-600   will  prompt  for  the  insertion  of  the  source  and
destination disks.

     Use ENTER to accept  the  current  prompt  values,  and  use
ESCape to back up to the previous prompt.

WARNING: ZAP-600 does NOT check for an overlap of the source  and
destination  sectors,  so it's possible to be writing to a sector
which you want to read!  It's advisable to copy one sector  at  a
time, although that's frustratingly slow.


Analyze Disk


     The ANALYZE mode reads and  displays  the  disk  information
which  is  stored in the first sector (absolute sector zero), and
will also attempt to locate all readable sectors on a disk.

     Prior to running a disk analysis, ZAP-600 assumes  that  you
are  attempting to read a standard Tandy 600 disk with 80 tracks,
9 sectors per track, 512  bytes  per  sector.    If  the  Track-0
information differs from these default settings, ZAP-600 will re-
configure these defaults when the disk analysis is performed.  To
use  the  default  settings, simply run ZAP-600. To use the specs
which appear on Track 0, run the  disk  analysis  to  reset  disk
format information to the current disk specs.

     ZAP-600 will ask if you wish to locate  disk  sectors  after
the  sector-zero  information  has  been  displayed.   A negative
response will return to the  main  menu.    A  positive  response
results  in  a display of track/sector information as the program
attempts to read each of the sectors on the disk.   The  absolute
sector  numbers of any unreadable sectors are displayed, as well.
To abort the sector location process, press ESCape.


REPEATED WARNING:  ZAP-600 is not fully tested  and  debugged  --
the  author  hopes  that errors will be fixed by others, since he
doesn't really have time to do it himself.  Backup RAM before you
use  the  program, and mess with the Directory and FAT sectors at
your own risk!!!

