
19200.TXT                                                           Page 1 of 8

This file contains a description of the operation of a Model III program called
"FLTRAN/CMD", which is used to transmit information to and from the Model 100
at 19.2K baud.  Enough information is contained herein for people using other
machines to duplicate this process either manually using a smart terminal
program, or automatically using a program written similar to FLTRAN.


Summary of Model 100 Capabilities:
----------------------------------
The Model 100 can be used to transmit and receive TEXT files at baud rates up
to 19,200 baud with no additional software other than the basic ROM.  These
text files are limited in that they cannot contain the following characters:

    NUL   CHR$(0)   Hex 00
    SUB   CHR$(26)  Hex 1A  -- [EOF]
    DEL   CHR$(127) Hex 7F

These characters are ignored by the Model 100 ROM, and CHR$(26) [EOF] is
interpreted as an "End of Transmission" character.


The Model 100 can also transmit and receive BASIC programs as long as the
limitations above are met, and they are in ASCII format.  Fortunately, the
ROM can automatically translate a "tokenized" BASIC file as it is transmitting
through the RS-232 port; simillarly, it can "detokenize" an Ascii BASIC file
as it is being received through the RS-232.


Summary of Model 100 File Transfer Requirements:
------------------------------------------------
To achieve high speed file transfers of both BASIC and TEXT files, a HOST
must provide the following capabilities:

   XON/XOFF Support - Software control to pause/resume a file transfer
   Capture Buffer   - Ability to capture data from the RS-232 into a buffer
                      in RAM.  If this buffer becomes full, the HOST should
                      be programmed to send an XOFF to pause the transmission,
                      dump the data received to some storage medium (eg disk),
                      then send an XON character to resume the transmission.
   "Null Modem"     - This device is often required for file transfers between
                      two computers without using a Modem.  There are articles
                      relating to the building of these devices available, or
                      they can be purchased from computer or parts stores.
                      NOTE:  Not all HOST systems require these!!!

19200.TXT                                                           Page 2 of 8

Optionally, to automate the file transfer, the HOST system could provide some
programming logic to send a CHR$(26) [EOF] at the end of a download to the
Model 100, and automatically close the receive buffer upon receipt of the EOF
character CHR$(26).  This automation is provided by FLTRAN/CMD, but can be
simulated manually by most smart terminal programs.


Description of FLTRAN/CMD:
--------------------------
FLTRAN is a program that runs on a TRS-80 Model III that allows files to be
transferred between the Model 100 and the Model III's diskettes.  The Model
III files must always be in ASCII format:  The Model 100 will NOT receive
a BASIC program that is tokenized on the Model III end.

When FLTRAN is first executed, a small menu is displayed to determine if a file
is to be either:

  1.  Sent to the Model 100 from the Model III; or
  2.  Received from the Model 100 to the Model III.

Upon making this selection, the program will request a file name to be sent
or received.  Any valid Model III filespec (a filename, optionally followed by
an extension, password, and/or drive specifier; in that order) may be entered.
After the entry of the file name, the program will execute its send or receive
routine, depending on the original selection made by the operator.  FLTRAN
assumes that the Model 100 is correctly set up after the file name is entered:

  If the send routine is used, the program assumes that the Model 100 is
  waiting for a file to be transmitted to it through the RS-232.

  If the receive routine is used, the program will wait for a file to be sent
  from the Model 100 through the RS-232.

19200.TXT                                                           Page 3 of 8

During the send routine, the program will send the contents of the selected
disk file through the RS-232 to the Model 100.  Each character sent is echoed
to the video screen, so the operator may witness the progress of the transfer.
The program will wait continually scan the RS-232 input port to see if the
Model 100 transmits an XOFF pause character.  If an XOFF is found, a routine
is executed that waits for an XON to be transmitted from the Model 100 before
resuming the transmission.  At the end of the file, the program will look at
the last character transmitted.  If it was not an EOF character, then the
program will automatically send an EOF to the Model 100.


During the receive routine, the program will continually scan the RS-232 port
for data coming from the Model 100.  After EVERY character received, the
program will perform the following routine:

   Send an XOFF to the Model 100;
   Place the character received in a RAM buffer;
   Determine if the RAM buffer should be dumped to disk and emptied;
   Echo the character received to the video display;
   Send an XON to the Model 100 to resume the transfer.

The XOFF and XON characters sent slow the actual throughput somewhat, but
allow the video screen to keep up with the transmission.  The Model III has
a one-byte RS-232 buffer, and in actual practice, the above routine has NOT
resulted in the loss of any characters.

When an EOF is received from the Model 100, the program will dump the contents
of the RAM buffer to disk.  Note that the program stores the EOF character at
the end of the disk file.


The receive routine in FLTRAN additionally "filters" out any line feed
characters (hex 0A) received after a carriage return character (hex 0D).  This
is to insure compatibility between Model III programs and Model 100 programs.

Conversely, the send routine will check to see if a line feed character (hex
0A) follows a carriage return character (hex 0D).  If not, the program will
automatically append a line feed character.  Again, this is to insure
compatibility between the Model 100 and the Model III.

This filtering action may not be necessary for other computers that wish to
duplicate the operation of FLTRAN, such as CP/M system that use line feeds
followed by carriage returns.

19200.TXT                                                           Page 4 of 8

Procedures to use on the Model 100:
-----------------------------------
The procedures for sending and receiving BASIC program and Ascii TEXT files
are similar, but handled differently.  This section will show the actual
procedures for sending and receiving both BASIC and TEXT files:


1.  Send BASIC program from Model 100 to HOST system:

    On the Model 100, select BASIC from the Main menu screen and press ENTER.

    Type the following BASIC command line:

    LOAD "<file>"

    where <file> is the actual file name of the program to be sent from
    the Model 100 to the HOST.  Note that this <file> is assumed to be
    a "compressed" (or tokenized) .BA file.  If it is stored in Ascii format,
    (i.e. as a .DO file), use the procedure in #3 (Send TEXT file from Model
    100 to HOST system).  After the file name is typed, press the ENTER key.

    When the OK prompt appears, type the following command line, but do NOT
    press the ENTER key just yet!

    SAVE "COM:98N1E"

    (This presupposes that the baud rate will be 19,200 baud.  See the table
    below if a different baud rate is to be used).

    Set up the HOST system at this time to receive a file from the Model 100.
    When the HOST system is ready, press the ENTER key on the Model 100.

    When the OK prompt appears again, the file will have been transmitted to
    the host system.  Note that the file appears as an Ascii file on the HOST
    system.  If the HOST system is automated (eg. if FLTRAN or a similar
    program is used), then the next step will NOT have to be performed:

    On the HOST system, write the received file to disk.

19200.TXT                                                           Page 5 of 8

2.  Send BASIC file from HOST system to the Model 100:

    On the Model 100, select BASIC from the Main MENU screen and press ENTER.

    Type the following command line:

    LOAD "COM:98N1E"

    and press ENTER.  (This presupposes that the baud rate will be 19,200 baud.
    See the table below if a different baud rate is to be used.)

    Set up the HOST system at this time to send a file from the HOST to the
    Model 100.  The file on the HOST system MUST be a BASIC program (with
    line numbers) and in ASCII format (not tokenized).

    When the HOST system is completed the transmission, it should send an EOF
    character (^Z or CHR$(26)).  This can be done automatically, or manually.

    The BASIC program will be on the Model 100 in tokenized format.  It can
    now be SAVEd, or used in any way.


3.  Sending a Model 100 TEXT file to HOST system:

    A TEXT file on the Model 100 has the extension ".DO".  On the Model 100,
    select the file to be transmitted from the MENU and press the ENTER key.

    The Model 100 will display the first few lines of the file.  At this point,
    press the F3 (Save) function key, or press CTRL-G.  The bottom line of the
    display will read:

    Save to:  _

    Type the following:

    COM:98N1E

    But do NOT press the ENTER key just yet!

    On the HOST system, set up to receive a file from the Model 100.  When the
    HOST system is ready, press ENTER on the Model 100.

    The Model 100 will then send the file to the HOST system through the RS-232
    port.

    At the end of the transmission, if a non-automated transfer is taking place
    (eg. not using FLTRAN or a similar program), then the HOST system should be
    manually instructed to save the file to disk.

19200.TXT                                                           Page 6 of 8	

4.  Sending an Ascii TEXT file from the HOST system to the Model 100:

    On the Model 100, select "TEXT" from the Main MENU and press ENTER.

    When asked for the "File to Edit?" enter the name of the file to be
    received from the HOST.  Note, that if an existing file is used, this
    procedure can be used to append the transmitted file ANYWHERE in the
    file, as determined by the Cursor Position.

    When the text screen is displayed, press the F2 key or type CTRL-V.
    The message "Load from:" will appear on the bottom line of the display.

    Type the following:

    COM:98N1E

    and press the ENTER key.

    At this time, set up the HOST system to transmit an Ascii file to the Model
    100 through the RS-232 port.  At the end of the transmission, the operator
    my have to manually supply a ^Z (CHR$(26) - EOF) to indicate the end of the
    transmission if an automated transfer is not being performed.

    At this time, the file should appear on the Model 100.


Miscellaneous notes and comments:
---------------------------------

    There is no "direct" way of sending machine language (.CO) files between a
    Model 100 and a HOST system.  A transfer could be done, however, if one or
    two application programs are used on the Model 100, such as UNLOAD.100 and
    HEXLDR.100.  These programs are used to "translate" machine language files
    to and from "Intel Hex Format".  The resulting "Intel Hex" file could then
    be transmitted between the Model 100 and the HOST system as an Ascii TEXT
    file.

19200.TXT                                                           Page 7 of 8

    Note that the procedures for sending and receiving BASIC and TEXT files use
    absolutely NO overhead on the Model 100!!!

    The Model 100, when faced with an error condition, is not too "friendly" to
    the HOST system.  Usually, if it is receiving, it just sends an XOFF
    without sending a corresponding XON character.  This condition can happen
    for many reasons, the most common being:

    ?OM Error    -  No more RAM space for file

    ?DS Error    -  A BASIC program was received that was not formatted
                    properly.  At this point, the last line will probably
                    contain the last correctly received line of the program.
                    The file can either be edited on the HOST system, or
                    received as a TEXT file and edited on the Model 100 and
                    then be converted to a BASIC program.


    This document presupposes that the FLTRAN program is being used.  The
    parameters above use the communication status COM:98N1E.  This can be
    changed to suit the HOST system used.  The 98N1E is interpreted as:

    9 - Baud Rate      (19,200 baud)
    8 - Word Length    (8 bits)
    N - Parity         (No Parity checking)
    1 - Stop Bits      (1 Stop bit)
    E - XON/XOFF       (Enabled)

    Other values for the above are shown in the tables below:

    Baud rate:
    1 -    75 Baud
    2 -   110 Baud
    3 -   300 Baud
    4 -   600 Baud
    5 -  1200 Baud
    6 -  2400 Baud
    7 -  4800 Baud
    8 -  9600 Baud
    9 - 19200 Baud


    Word Length:
    6 - 6 bits (Not used very often)
    7 - 7 bits (Will not transmit Model 100 graphics)
    8 - 8 bits

19200.TXT                                                           Page 8 of 8

    Parity:
    I - Ignore Parity (Usually used with Word Length = 7)
    O - Odd Parity    (Not often used)
    E - Even Parity   (Usually used with Word Length = 7)
    N - No Parity     (Usually used with Word Length = 8)


    XON/XOFF:
    E - Enable   - Recommended for high speed transfers
    D - Disable  - Not recommended for high speed transfers



Please send comments and/or suggestions regarding this file to:

    larry gensch
    [72236,3516]

